---
title: M-19-19 Update to Data Center Optimization Initiative (DCOI)
permalink: /policy/
layout: page
sidenav: policy

---

[Download this memorandum as a PDF](/assets/files/m_19_19.pdf)

**M-19-19**

**June 25, 2019**

**MEMORANDUM FOR CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICERS OF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS AND
AGENCIES**

**FROM: Suzette Kent**

**Federal Chief Information Officer**

# SUBJECT: Update to Data Center Optimization Initiative (DCOI)

The Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA)[^1]
required the Federal Government to consolidate and optimize agencies'
data centers by October 1, 2018. The Office of Management and Budget
(OMB) responded by issuing M-16-19, Data Center Optimization Initiative
(DCOI),[^2] which set priorities for data center closures and efficiency
improvements through the end of Fiscal Year 2018. The FITARA Enhancement
Act of 2017[^3] extended the data center requirements of FITARA until
October 1, 2020. As a result, OMB is updating and extending the Data
Center Optimization Initiative.

This Memorandum contains requirements for the consolidation and
optimization of Federal data centers in accordance with FITARA. It
establishes consolidation and optimization targets and metrics for
Federal agencies, as well as requirements for reporting on their
progress.

## Background

The Federal Government has made great strides in consolidating and
optimizing Federal data centers since 2010, when the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) launched the initial Federal Data Center
Consolidation Initiative (FDCCI).[^4] Since then, agencies have achieved
significant cost savings, have improved their understanding of energy
efficiency technologies, and have begun implementing cloud-based and
hybrid environments.

After eight years of work in consolidating and closing Federal data
centers, OMB has seen diminishing returns from agency data center
closures. The Government has picked off much of the "low-hanging" fruit
of easily-consolidated infrastructure. OMB now will focus on targeted
improvements in key areas where agencies can make meaningful
improvements and achieve further cost savings through optimization and
closures, as well as driving further maturity in IT modernization.

As agencies gain greater IT spending transparency through Capital
Planning and Investment Control (CPIC) and Technology Business
Management (TBM), the resulting data will support and enable their
ability to rationalize their application portfolios to find greater
return on investment, in alignment with the 2018 Federal Cloud Computing
Strategy ("Cloud Smart").[^5] Rather than focusing on infrastructure
alone, agencies must consider what applications are running in their
data centers to facilitate further consolidation and optimization. This
will frequently require updating legacy applications to take advantage
of modern technologies such as APIs, microservices, and cloud, as well
as replacing bespoke systems with commercial offerings when
cost-effective. Agencies should consider carefully the Total Cost of
Ownership (TCO) when making such determinations, not just licensing and
hosting costs.

## Authority

The requirements in this Memorandum apply to the 24 Federal agencies
covered by the Chief Financial Officers (CFO) Act of 1990,[^6] including
the Department of Defense.[^7] The head of each covered agency, assisted
by the Chief Information Officer (CIO) of the agency, is required to
submit to OMB annually 1) a comprehensive inventory of the data centers
owned, operated, or maintained by or on behalf of the agency, and 2) a
multi-year strategy to achieve the consolidation and optimization of
these data centers. Each agency, under the direction of its CIO, must
submit quarterly updates on their progress towards activity completion,
consolidation & optimization metrics, and cost savings realized through
the implementation of their strategy.

OMB is required to establish the deadlines, requirements, metrics for
agencies' reports, and must review the reports and progress of agencies
towards consolidation and optimization.

## Policy

This Memorandum establishes a new Data Center Optimization Initiative
(DCOI), which replaces the previous DCOI articulated in OMB Memorandum
M-16-19, *Data Center Optimization Initiative Memorandum* (August 1,
2016) (M-16-19). Effective immediately, OMB rescinds OMB Memorandum
M-16-19.

## Development Freeze for New and Current Data Centers

Agencies may not budget any funds or resources toward initiating a new
agency-owned data center or significantly expanding an existing
agency-owned data center without approval from OMB. To request such
approval, agencies must submit a written justification that includes an
analysis of alternatives, including opportunities for cloud services,
shared services, and third party colocation. This justification must
include an explanation of the net reduction in the agency's data center
inventory that will be facilitated by the new or expanded data center
(such as through consolidation of multiple existing data centers into a
single new data center).

This development freeze shall not apply to critical agency facilities as
described under the "Key Mission Facilities for Data Management" section
below. However, agencies are strongly encouraged to discuss with OMB in
advance of any planned expansions or new construction of data center
facilities.

## Consolidation and Closure of Existing Data Centers

As previously required by the FDCCI, agencies shall continue to reduce
application, system, and database inventories to essential enterprise
levels by increasing the use of virtualization to enable pooling of
storage, network and computer resources, and dynamic allocation
on-demand. Thereafter, agencies shall evaluate options for the
consolidation and closure of existing data centers, where practical, in
alignment with the **Cloud Smart**[^8] strategy. The Cloud Smart
strategy emphasizes the use of risk-based decision-making and service
delivery as key considerations in evaluating cloud technologies.
Potential options for migration include:

-   Transitioning to provisioned services, including cloud technologies,
    to the furthest extent practical;

-   Migrating to inter-agency shared services, intra-agency shared
    services, or colocated data centers; and

-   Migrating to more optimized data centers within the agency's data
    center inventory.

### Shared Services Managing Partner

OMB still considers shared services to be a cornerstone of data center
consolidation. As such, the General Services Administration (GSA) Office
of Government-wide Policy (OGP) shall continue to act as the data center
Shared Services Managing Partner, the Managing Partner of the Federal
Government's Data Center Line of Business (LoB), as well as the Data
Center and Cloud Optimization Initiative Program Management Office
(DCCOI PMO). In this role, OGP will continue to serve as a trusted
agent, information broker, and subject matter expert to assist data
center providers and consumers of data center services by providing
guidance on technology advancements, innovation, cybersecurity,
acquisition, and best practices. However, OMB will no longer expect GSA
to establish and maintain a data center shared services marketplace.

OMB tasks the DCCOI PMO, in consultation with the Office of Shared
Services and Performance Improvement (OSSPI), and the Technology
Transformation Service (TTS), with the following actions:

-   Coordinating with OMB to develop resources and guidance on data
    center and cloud implementation and optimization;

-   Coordinating with the government-wide IT Category Manager and other
    key GSA components to create and maintain an inventory of
    acquisition tools, contract requirements language, and products
    specific to the technology and services surrounding data center
    optimization, including procurement vehicles for the acquisition of
    automated infrastructure management and monitoring tools;

-   Developing, implementing, and maintaining financial and service
    models pertaining to cloud and data center procurement with
    customer/partner agencies and shared service providers; and

-   Providing a forum for participating and interested agencies to
    discuss cloud and data center implementation and optimization.

## Alignment to the President's Management Agenda

Over the past two years, the Office of Management and Budget has
received extensive feedback from agencies as they implemented the Data
Center Optimization Initiative, identifying areas where agencies were
able to achieve the greatest improvements and savings, as well as those
that did not yield a positive return on investment. In alignment with
the Administration's directive of shifting from low-value to high-value
work,[^9] and removing unnecessarily burdensome reporting,[^10] OMB
revises its focus from M-16-19 as follows.

Agencies have seen the greatest gains in cost savings and optimization
in their larger, dedicated data centers providing general compute
resources to the enterprise. However, the previous definition of a
"tiered" data center resulted in spaces reported as server closets
simply due to not having a backup generator or other hardware but that
operated as a data center in all other regards. The intent, instead,
should be to treat these facilities as full-fledged data centers.
Therefore, for the purposes of this Memorandum, agencies shall report
purpose-built physically separate and dedicated spaces as tiered data
centers when they appropriately meet key criteria.[^11] Agencies should
focus their efforts on "general compute" data centers for their
rationalization efforts -- those that host business applications that
are largely hardware-agnostic -- rather than on special purpose data
centers. These will be key targets for application rationalization,
leading to greater consolidation and optimization outcomes.

On the other hand, agencies have seen little real savings from the
consolidation of non-tiered facilities, small server closets, telecom
closets, individual print and file servers, and single computers acting
as servers. Optimizing and consolidating these spaces not designed to be
data centers generally incurs large costs for agencies, with little or
no benefit from efficiencies gained. This often introduces additional
hurdles in the form of increased latency and other performance
detriments that unfavorably affect agency mission delivery. As a result,
OMB will no longer require agencies to consolidate these server closets,
meet optimization targets, or include them in their inventory
submissions. However, agencies should consolidate any business
applications hosted in non-tiered data centers and closets when
cost-effective and as appropriate for accomplishing the agency mission
and enhancing system security or information privacy.[^12]

Private sector-provided cloud services are not data centers for the
purposes of this Memorandum. Agencies are no longer required to report
their cloud investments as part of their data center inventories, as
this information is already collected through the Capital Planning and
Investment Control (CPIC) process.

As OMB's understanding of the Federal data center portfolio has evolved,
it has become clear that prior OMB DCOI guidance on this topic inflated
the apparent number of Government data centers. The apparent increase
did not reflect the actual number of dedicated Government data centers
because there was no dramatic increase in new facilities during that
time. OMB will continue to refine the agency reporting requirements to
make this portfolio information more transparent for oversight purposes.

### Key Mission Facilities for Data Management

In the original M-16-19 Memorandum, OMB created an exemption for some
data centers from closures:

> *data centers that are physically inseparable from non-IT hardware
> (e.g. simulation and modeling devices, sensors, etc.) and that perform
> a specific, non-standard set of tasks (e.g. do not provide general
> purpose computing or storage services to Federal facilities).*[^13]

However, in practice, agencies have many types of mission-critical or
non-severable systems and services that do not fit into this definition.
These include MRI machines, weather stations, air traffic control
systems, supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems, and
other uses where separation of data collection, storage, and processing
is technically possible but increases latency beyond a reasonable limit.
Agencies cannot consolidate many types of systems in remote locations
without detriment to the agency mission; these range from embassy file
servers in foreign countries to dam floodgate controls. Furthermore,
numerous Federal labs and research facilities have data centers that
cannot be consolidated without an unacceptably negative impact on
performance; these include special-purpose processing nodes (SPPNs),
high-performance computing (HPC) nodes, and other similar systems.
Finally, numerous data centers will continue to be required for legal or
logistical reasons.

As a result, for individual tiered data centers that fall within these
categories, agencies may request an exemption from closure targets with
justification. While these data centers may be exempt from closure
requirements, agencies should optimize them for energy and operational
efficiency where practical. In rare cases where further optimization may
negatively impact performance of critical systems, agencies may request
a supplemental exemption from optimization targets.

Exemptions will be provisionally applied by OMB, but may be overturned
at a later date based on further review or a future change in
requirements.

### Closures and Cost Savings

The amount of information gathered and processed by the Federal
Government continues to increase, especially with the rise of the
"Internet of Things," artificial intelligence (AI) mobile computing, and
digital service delivery. This has resulted in increasing agency compute
needs to keep up with demand. Although vendor-provided services such as
cloud technologies are potential solutions, they are not always more
cost-effective alternatives to agency-hosted services. As a result of
work that has occurred over the past years there will be continuous
improvements, but the Federal Government should not expect to see
continued dramatic savings or large-scale closures from ongoing data
center consolidation and optimization efforts as agency needs grow.

Agencies should consider opportunities for investments that may yield
long-term savings through energy efficiency. For instance, refreshing
inefficient hardware may lead to long-term savings, especially where
legacy systems past their end-of-life incur large costs for support.
Agencies should also consider EPEAT-registered[^14] servers when
upgrading or replacing hardware to maximize energy efficiency. The
standard used by EPEAT requires registered servers to be ENERGY STAR
certified and support American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and
Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) Class A2 or higher allowable
environmental operating range, and further incentivizes efficiency
levels beyond ENERGY STAR for power supplies and active/inactive power
states. Agencies are also encouraged to use performance contracting
including Energy Savings Performance Contracts[^15] and Utility Energy
Service Contracts[^16] to finance energy improvements when
cost-effective.

OMB will continue to work with agencies to set agency-specific goals for
data center closures and cost savings that are appropriate to the
mission and budget of each agency. OMB will update these targets from
those set for M-16-19 to match agencies' current status and progress.

### Automated Infrastructure Management

Agencies should continue to replace manual collections and reporting of
operational data as well as systems, software, and hardware inventory
housed within data centers with automated monitoring, inventory, and
management tools (e.g. Data Center Infrastructure Management (DCIM).
Agencies will need to update these tools to match the performance
metrics defined in this memorandum.

Any data center initiation, significant expansion, or migration project
that received Development, Modernization, and Enhancement (DM&E) funds
in fiscal year 2017 or later must implement automated monitoring and
management tools. However, agencies are strongly encouraged to implement
automated monitoring and management tools throughout their data centers
especially those in excess of 100 kW.

To the extent permissible under the Federal Acquisition Regulation
(FAR), agencies must include standard automated infrastructure
management requirements for all new data center service contracts or
procurement vehicles. Further, any new data center contractor
procurement vehicle must require the contractor to report to the
contracting agency whether the contracted facility utilizes automated
infrastructure management, except where such data is already reported
directly to OMB or GSA through participation in a multi-agency service
program. To ensure consistency of requirements among agencies, the CIO
Council, with support from the GSA IT category manager and other
appropriate stakeholders, will develop standard language as needed.

## Performance Metrics

Previously, OMB calculated the performance metrics outlined in M-16-19
as averages across an agency's entire inventory of applicable data
centers. These calculations resulted in a lack of clarity around
specific successes and failures across an agency's inventory, and a few
low-performing data centers would dramatically impact the average
efficiency of an entire agency. This would result in data centers
scheduled for closure -- which would not be cost-effective for
optimization -- negatively affecting the overall average. Several of the
metrics were nearly impossible for agencies to meet, and the only
success criteria was whether the average did or did not meet the given
target. As a result, these averages do not yield transparency into how
effectively or efficiently an agency is running data centers, or whether
the agency is improving over time.

Moving forward, to obtain more accurate measure of data centers
performance, OMB will avoid using averages for metrics whenever possible
and will instead identify metrics where agencies can
demonstrate continuous improvement beyond the performance period of this
memorandum. OMB will recommend guidelines for reasonable performance on
these metrics, when appropriate, across the entire Federal enterprise,
based on real, collected data baselines.

Per the classifications above, OMB will focus these measurements on the
remaining open, agency-owned, tiered facilities. As indicated
previously, enterprise-focused oversight metrics are not generally
appropriate or useful for non-tiered server closets, and improving
efficiencies in these areas can cost many times more than any savings
gained. As a result, agencies should only consider making these
improvements to these smaller facilities if cost-effective and in
alignment with their mission.

### Updated Metric: Virtualization

Portability, scalability, and elasticity are key measures for long-term
savings and optimization, and are important concepts in the **Cloud
Smart** strategy. As such, OMB prioritizes the increased virtualization
and containerization of Federal systems as critical for IT modernization
efforts, to drive efficiency and application portability. OMB expects
all new agency applications to use virtualization or containerization
whenever possible and appropriate.

However, due to the number of virtual client applications fluctuating
based on demand, calculating these as a ratio to physical hosts, as
described in M-16-19, is not ideal. The former policy also did not
include mainframes that can support virtualization, or include servers
that host containers through popular tools. Instead, OMB will require
agencies to report the number of servers and mainframes that are
currently serving as hosts for *virtualized or containerized systems* in
their agency-managed data centers.

Agencies are no longer required to report their cloud investments as
part of their data center inventories because this information is
already collected through Capital Planning and Investment Control (CPIC)
process. Given that transitioning applications to the cloud may reduce
the count of virtual hosts in their data centers, and given that cloud
providers use virtualized systems by definition, agencies *may* report
systems under their cloud investments towards this total count to more
accurately reflect the state of their virtualized portfolio.

### Updated Metric: Advanced Energy Metering

Advanced metering and management tools such as DCIM systems are
essential to track performance in a continuous improvement process.
Tools like DCIM systems are used to identify specific opportunities and
best practices, identify stranded capacity, and optimize operational
parameters such as environmental conditions including temperature and
humidity. Furthermore, advanced monitoring systems contribute to
enhanced reliability and resiliency of data centers by providing early
warning of potential problems (e.g., hot spots and problems with the
power distribution system, cooling system, and cooling plant), fault
detection and alarms, predictive maintenance, as well as energy and
demand savings and optimization opportunities (e.g. load scheduling and
power capping). Installing advanced energy meters in data centers, as
described in M-16-19, was required by Executive Order 13693: Planning
for Federal Sustainability in the Next Decade, but that order has since
been revoked by the Executive Order 13834: Efficient Federal
Operations.[^17]

Although automated monitoring is advantageous for agencies to gain
better insight to energy usage and to drive optimization, it can also be
prohibitively expensive for agencies to purchase and install these
tools. Many facilities already have energy metering and other
measurement devices that are not specific to the data center area of the
facility, and with a limited amount of sub-metering an experienced
facilities manager will be able to estimate energy usage accurately.
Moreover, it is not useful for agencies to install these tools in a
facility they are planning on closing. Therefore, agencies will be
expected to have advanced energy metering and sub-metering, sufficient
to accurately estimate Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE), for all
remaining data centers over 100 kW that they are planning to keep open.

OMB will continue to track agencies' implementations of advanced energy
metering by measuring the number of facilities with a majority of the
space having this metering, rather than using a combined metric of
metering and gross floor area as required under M-16-19. Furthermore,
agencies will be able to request an exemption for individual facilities
where it is too costly to install this monitoring, or if they are
planning to close the facility.

### Removed Metric: Energy Efficiency

M-16-19 required agencies to report the energy efficiency of data
centers using PUE, the proportion of energy used by IT equipment
compared to the total energy used by the data center. That memorandum
set a target goal of PUE of 1.5 for existing data centers, and 1.4 for
new data centers, as defined in Executive Order 13693 -- which, as
mentioned previously, was revoked by Executive Order 13834.

The PUE metric is not always appropriate for comparison across multiple
facilities or agencies. Differences in factors such as level of
redundancy, geographic location, weather, time of year, and even
building construction can have an impact on the measured PUE of a
facility. For instance, an extremely efficient data center in a warmer
part of the country can easily register a higher PUE than a less
efficient data center in a colder climate, but agency mission may
determine the location of that facility. Improvement in PUE over time
should be included in the agencies' approach to their data center
management, and best practices for both measurement and optimization
should be pursued.

OMB will continue to collect PUE as part of the inventory reporting for
statistical purposes, but it will no longer set an overall target for
PUE or use this metric in isolation as an indicator of good management
practices. The intent of energy efficiency initiatives under DCOI is to
drive savings through lowered energy usage, but there is an upper bound
on the return on investment gained through this optimization. Instead,
agencies are encouraged, but not required, to report cost savings and
avoidance through efficient energy usage and improvements as part of
their data center strategic plans.

### Updated Metric: Server Utilization

FITARA establishes the requirement for OMB to track data center
"efficiencies, including, at a minimum, server efficiency."[^18]
However, the concept of server efficiency is widely misunderstood. As
early as 2009, OMB reported that Federal servers generally had very low
server utilization rates -- however, this was absent a more
sophisticated analysis of expected usage, and without properly taking
into account hours of business, backups, redundant systems for
unexpected load and failover, and other practices common in both the
Federal and Commercial sectors. It is also important to note that the
frequency of hardware refresh is one of the key components of server
efficiency, but counterintuitively newer hardware usually will reflect
lower utilization due to gained efficiency in processing power, storage,
and other performance indicators versus the workload the server
supports.

"Server efficiency" is a relative term, depending on the nature of the
hardware and applications running on the server (i.e., citizen-facing
systems that may only have high utilization during peak business hours).
Agency mission may also determine whether a server is running
efficiently or not -- possessing many redundant systems may be
inefficient for one agency, but necessary for another to be able to
respond to critical emergencies and security incidents. Servers may
become over-utilized without proper monitoring or redundancy, leading to
unexpected failure and data loss. A server running at the target
utilization as described in M-16-19 under traditional practices would
more likely be an indicator of a system that may fail due to
over-utilization, rather than one that is well-optimized.

Higher utilization is best achieved through agile system management
practices generally referred to as DevOps or DevSecOps, which include
containerization (as measured above under Virtualization), as well as
dynamically and rapidly assigning resources based on measured usage and
projected need. These same practices also enable a higher return on
investment in the adoption of cloud technologies. However, as these
practices are largely a function of application management and not data
center management, they may not be in the purview of the data center
facilities teams. Therefore, a coordinated effort across agency software
engineering, facilities, and security teams will be required to improve
the maturity of practices, as described in the **Cloud Smart** strategy.

The Federal Government should be identifying and reducing underutilized
servers. The metric defined for Server Utilization in M-16-19 set a
baseline for utilization as a calculated average, which did not aid in
finding and removing underutilized servers. Moreover, this was measured
as a combined metric with "automated monitoring," making the target more
difficult for agencies to achieve.

To improve this methodology, OMB will task agencies with identifying and
reporting the number of underutilized production servers in each data
center, with the expectation that agencies should reduce the number of
these servers over time. Because backups, standbys, development, and
test servers are all critical to a well-functioning enterprise
information system, they will not be included in this measurement -- but
agencies must count and report these servers as part of their data
center inventories for transparency.

Due to mission-specific, hardware-specific, and application-specific
requirements that may influence efficient operations, OMB will not
establish a specific methodology for determining server utilization
evaluation for each agency. However, OMB expects agencies to consider
CPU usage and storage space at a minimum. Agencies should evaluate their
portfolio regularly as part of the Application Rationalization set forth
in the **Cloud Smart** strategy, to identify applications that require
large amounts of resources seasonally or infrequently which may be ideal
candidates to shut down or move to cloud technologies

In reporting the number of underutilized servers, agencies should use
automated monitoring software to measure application usage to accurately
determine needs, such as storage space, CPU, memory, and redundancy.
However, OMB will no longer include automated monitoring as part of this
metric, as it is largely duplicative of the metering under the Automated
Infrastructure Management requirement and Advanced Energy Metering
metric, and a combined metric would dilute the key information.

### Removed Metric: Facility Utilization

In the process of consolidating data centers, OMB expects agencies to
find opportunities to move existing server inventory to other
facilities, resulting in greater density at the destination facility.
However, OMB has determined via agency input that in practice Facility
Utilization as a metric may conflict with other, more impactful
priorities. For instance, increasing facility utilization can negatively
affect energy efficiency; meanwhile, improved virtualization generally
reduces facility utilization as agencies consolidate their systems.

Moreover, the method of calculating utilization outlined in M-16-19 uses
an idealized average for the floor space usage of server racks, without
taking into account elements such as mainframes, vertical designs not
requiring raised floors, or planning for future expansion. Because
facility utilization is largely redundant with accounting for progress
towards the overall consolidation effort, OMB will no longer track
agencies performance in this area.

### New Metric: Availability

In the commercial space, the most critical element for an infrastructure
provider is facility availability. Most service level agreements contain
explicit discussion of service availability guarantees. At a minimum,
the Federal Government should be prepared to deliver the comparable
level of service as that provided by private sector data centers and
cloud services.

OMB will require agencies to report the planned hours of availability
for each data center, as well as any unplanned outages for that data
center over the reporting period, also measured in hours. Unavailability
will include unplanned outages of a majority of the facility due to
disaster, systems failure, cybersecurity events, or other negative
events as well as any other hours that would otherwise be planned as
available hours.

This metric will track the data center's availability, not individual
server or application uptime or availability.

## Clarification on the Prioritization of Concerns

With numerous metrics and possible methods to optimize a data center,
agencies could select a variety of solutions and ways to invest in this
process. However, not all of these methods will yield the same level of
impact. Moreover, after so many years of optimizing data centers, many
agencies have already created long-term plans for their investments in
these areas.

OMB prioritizes the effort to consolidate and optimize data centers in
the following hierarchy, to maximize the return on investment and based
on the level of impact for the effort. When considering the allocation
of limited resources or conflicting priorities, agencies should consider
their mission goals first, and this prioritization second, in the
following descending order of importance:

1.  Consolidation and Closure

2.  Optimization

  i.  Virtualization
  ii. Availability
  iii. Energy Metering
  iv. Server Utilization

## Reporting

OMB will collect data on an agency-by-agency basis through the
Integrated Data Collection (IDC), as follows:

1.  Agencies must continue to maintain complete inventories of all data
    center facilities, closure/consolidation plans, and properties of
    each facility owned, operated, or maintained by or on behalf of the
    agency. Agencies must update these inventories at least annually,
    but agencies may optionally submit a quarterly update to improve the
    accuracy of the data.

2.  Agencies must annually evaluate the costs of operating and
    maintaining current facilities, and develop year-by-year targets for
    cost savings and cost avoidance due to consolidation and
    optimization through the sunset of this policy. Agencies shall
    report all realized cost savings and cost avoidance under the DCOI
    as part of their DCOI Strategic Plan (see below).

3.  Agencies must report quarterly progress toward meeting their
    closures & metric target values. Agencies may submit this
    information as a separate narrative document.

Agencies participating as a tenant in an inter-agency shared services
provider data center are not required to report metric values to OMB.
The provider will report this data to OMB.

### DCOI Strategic Plan

In accordance with FITARA,[^19] each agency head shall annually publish
a Strategic Plan to describe the agency's consolidation and optimization
strategy until the date this policy will sunset. The DCOI Strategic Plan
and milestones described below replace existing requirements for data
center consolidation plans.

Agencies' DCOI Strategic Plans must include, at a minimum, the
following:

1.  Planned and achieved performance levels for each optimization
    metric, by year;

2.  Planned and achieved closures, by year;

3.  An explanation for any optimization metrics and closures for which
    the agency did not meet the planned level in a previous Strategic
    Plan;

4.  Year-by-year calculations of target and actual agency-wide spending
    and cost savings on data centers through the sunset of this policy,
    including:

    a.  A description of any initial costs for data center consolidation
        and optimization; and

    b.  Life cycle cost savings and other improvements (including those
        beyond the sunset of this policy, if applicable).

5.  Historical costs, cost savings, and cost avoidances due to data
    center consolidation and optimization; and

6.  A statement from the agency CIO stating whether the agency has
    complied with all reporting requirements in this memorandum and the
    data center requirements of FITARA. If the agency has not complied
    with all reporting requirements, the agency must provide a statement
    describing the reasons for not complying.

Agencies are required to publish their Strategic Plans at
\[agency\].gov/digitalstrategy under a section entitled, "Data Center
Optimization Initiative Strategic Plans." Agencies shall also make their
strategic plans available in a machine-readable format. OMB will provide
instructions to agencies, including a schema, 30 days of the issuance of
this memorandum.

Agencies shall update agency digital milestones files, also posted on
their websites, to identify at a minimum five milestones per fiscal year
to be achieved through the DCOI. Agencies should update their DCOI
milestones quarterly as they progress. OMB will review these milestones
with the agencies in quarterly PortfolioStat[^20] sessions.

## Effective Date and Sunset

This Memorandum is effective immediately, and will automatically sunset
on September 30, 2020.

[^1]: Title VIII, Subtitle D of the National Defense Authorization Act
    (NDAA) for Fiscal Year 2015, Pub. L. No. 113-291, available at
    https://www.congress.gov/113/plaws/publ291/PLAW-113publ291.pdf

[^2]: <https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/memoranda/2016/m_16_19_1.pdf>

[^3]: FITARA Enhancement Act of 2017, Pub. L. No. 115-88,

    <https://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/publ88/PLAW-115publ88.pdf>

[^4]: FDCCI was established by OMB "Memo for CIOs: Federal Data Center
    Consolidation Initiative," issued on February 26, 2010, and modified
    by subsequent memoranda.
    <https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/assets/egov_docs/federal_data_center_consolidation_initiative_02-26-2010.pdf>

[^5]: <https://cloud.cio.gov>

[^6]: Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990, 31 U.S.C. § 901.

[^7]: Pursuant to Sec. 834(b)(1)(C) of the FY2015 NDAA, the Department
    of Defense may submit to OMB, in lieu of the Strategic Plan
    described in this Memorandum, the defense-wide plan and cost savings
    report required under sections 2867(b)(2) and 2867(d), respectively,
    of the FY2012 NDAA. If submitting such plans and reports in lieu of
    the Strategic Plan, DOD shall ensure all information required by the
    Strategic Plan is included in the submitted plans and reports.

[^8]: Cloud Smart encourages agencies to consider vendor-based
    solutions, agency-hosted solutions, inter- and intra-agency shared
    services, multi-cloud, and hybrid solutions as appropriate for
    mission and security. <https://cloud.cio.gov>.

[^9]: President's Management Agenda*, Shifting From Low-Value to
    High-Value Work*, available at:

    <https://www.performance.gov/CAP/CAP_goal_6.html>

[^10]: *Reducing Burden for Federal Agencies by Rescinding and Modifying
    OMB Memoranda*:
    <https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/memoranda/2017/M-17-26.pdf>

[^11]: These key criteria can be found in the most current Integrated
    Data Collection instructions provided to agencies each quarter.

[^12]: In accordance with OMB Circular A-130, [*Managing Information as
    a Strategic
    Resource*](https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/circulars/A130/a130revised.pdf),
    CIOs should work with Senior Agency Officials for Privacy (SAOPs) to
    ensure compliance with applicable privacy requirements and to manage
    privacy risk when considering the consolidation of data centers that
    process personally identifiable information.

[^13]: M-16-19, at 9. Available at:
    <https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/memoranda/2016/m_16_19_1.pdf>

[^14]: Electronic Product Environmental Assessment Tool, available at:
    <https://www.epa.gov/greenerproducts/electronic-product-environmental-assessment-tool-epeat>

[^15]: *See* 42 U.S.C. §§ 8287, 8287a-d.

[^16]: *See* 42 U.S.C. § 8256, 10 U.S.C. § 2913, and 10 U.S.C. § 2866.

[^17]: <https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/executive-order-regarding-efficient-federal-operations/>

[^18]: 44 U.S.C. § 3601 note.b.2.G.ii.

[^19]: *See* FITARA Section 834(b)(1)(A)-(E).

[^20]: OMB Memorandum M-12-10, *Implementing PortfolioStat* (March 30,
    2012), available at:
    <https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/memoranda/2012/m-12-10_1.pdf>
